Do you remember this little movie?
The boy is being “adamant”.
He is seeking attention!
He is putting up a great show, seeking attention
too, in the process!
In English, they calling it throwing a temper
tantrum.
I was looking for that word.
Where did it come from?
What is the etymology?
And…
I was surprised.
Because..
it seems the origin is disputed..
Nobody knows who started this off as a word
in what context and why, even though they
know about its first occurrences.
Some people say it is probably from an ancient
British usage.
It is clearly mentioned here, “unknown origin”.
See?
Some say, Shakespeare referred to a “ghost
animal” in King Lear called the Tantrabobus.
Some, … if a word ends in ‘..um’, they
claim it must be Latin!
People say it is from there!
Some people also refer to Tantra, (don’t
ask me too much about it..!) that Tantric..
Sanskrit word.. but.
Tantra / Tantric in Sanskrit means weaving,
interweaving, intermingling, spinning, .. and
has no connection between that and tantrum.
Okay, so you are calling it a disputed origin..
Let me spin you a new yarn!
I think this is where it comes from!
A word from our own Tamil language!
Thanthiram.
It is a trick deployed by that child, either
knowingly or unknowingly..
And, this is the subject of our talk today!
Namaste!
Four hundred and thirty five!
Mind the Mind!
We saw the child throw a fit!
The mind is playing games.
And, we are going to learn a little extra,
about this “mind”.
This is Aristotle.
And, 300 years before Christ, he gave us a
story.
And, you know what his point was?
“The heart is the seat of the soul.
That’s where a person lives.
All thoughts reside there.
That is where the soul lives..
What is the brain for, then?
When the heart works furiously, it generates
heat..
The brain is the radiator that serves the
purpose of ‘cooling the heat generated by
the heart’”.
The brain, the head, was supposed to be the
radiator, it seems!
How easily and summarily he dismissed the
brain!?
Not too long ago, just about a hundred and
fifty, two hundred years ago, mankind wasn’t
too forward in their thoughts about, … (in
their thoughts!) about what’s going on in
the brain.
A brain.. is encased in a skull..
A skull like this one.
If you want to understand about a person,
why is he murdering so many people…, or
why is this person such a genius mathematician,
or.. why is this lady singing so well, if
you want to find answers for those, all you
needed to do was shave their head and feel
it, it seems.
You could actually have your fingers go all
over the head, look at the cracks where plates
interlocked into other plates, the bumps,
the curves, using those, one could judge a
person’s very character, they said!
Less than two hundred years ago, people were
still believing it..
It was a science at that time.
Now, it is a pseudoscience, not too many people
believe it thankfully.
But, this science was called Phrenology.
So, if one were to judge your acquisitiveness,
how you amass wealth, are you a stingy person,
will you be rich in life, will you be financially
fit, … you will probably have to find out
how bumpy you are in this part of your head.
Similarly, conjugal bliss.., marital bliss,
how well will you be.. a performer, in your
family life, how will women be attracted to
you, .. how will men be attracted to you..
if we were to want to find that out, guess
where?
That is where!
A belief like this!
About the brain!
This too, has been proven to be a pseudoscience!
Not just this..
There have been further theories.
These theories are the basis on which this
book is written.
It is called The Whole-Brain Child.
Many strategies to nurture your child’s
developing mind.
To develop the complete brain.
There are many parts.
They all work together at the same time.
There is a lot of push and pull.
The result of that famous push and pull, continuous
push and pull, that is the performance of
the child in front of you.
And, how do you engage, how do you understand,
how do you react to that, strategies for that.
Based on pseudoscience, based on myths.
Even if that were pseudoscience, why did I
really feel attracted to this book?
A colleague was reading this book.
And, she showed one particular phrase in that
book, and that hooked me in.
And, that phrase went like this: Are you struggling
for survival, with your kid?
Unable to shut your eyes even for a moment?
Is it giving you a torrid time?
Are you even wondering why you even gave birth
to this ‘monster’?!
Are you STRUGGLING for survival?
Wait!
These are the moments that you are going to
help the child learn not just how to survive,
but to thrive.
“The moments you are just trying to survive
are actually opportunities to help your child
thrive..!”
Wow!
Something interesting, I thought, and I went
into the book, and, boy!
Was I rewarded!
Left Brain, Right Brain, we have encountered
this in Quotidians earlier.
People have started debunking this already.
That there is nothing of this sort..
That the left brain is all about mathematical,
logical, and the right brain is about creative
visualisation…
That all this is a bag of hot air.
Let us anyway take a look at that list.
So, what’s Left Brain?
Yes, you will be analytical.
Yes, you will be numerically oriented.
And, yes, language, words, sentences, will
just flow!
Left Brain thinking.
And, what about the Right Brain?
Yes, you will be imaginative.
You will be able to think of things that never
were, probably never will be, that’s imaginative.
Yes, your emotional intelligence, your ability
to be composed, your ability to think big
picture, to see what-if scenarios, your emotional
intelligence will be high, and finally, you
will be expressive.
Your ability to express them will be very
good!
Left Brain.
Right Brain.
They say some people lean towards the Left
Brain, while others lean more towards the
Right.
A myth still exists like that.
A prevalent understanding..
They debunked this too.
Sorry, there is nothing of this sort.
It involves itself only as a whole brain.
Don’t be misled.
Don’t go for online tests to find out “Are
you 75% left-brained?”..
All that is just hogwash.
Ok, this was Left Right.
There is a Top Bottom too.
Shall we see that now?
We have seen this one TOO in Quotidians earlier.
Deep inside, in the bottommost layer, is the
Reptilian Brain.
The Reptilian Brain knows only two things.
It will run towards things that it considers
food!
It will run away from things that consider
it food!
Fight.
Or Flight.
It cannot have any emotions, any other kind
of higher level thinking.
Reptilian Brain.
Amygdala.
We have read about this earlier.
Over and above this, at a higher level, there
is the Mammalian Brain.
This Mammalian Brain has emotions, has feelings,
an expectation of sorts that if it performs
the same thing again, the same result will
happen..
Habituation..
And Memory.
A recall and recognition about something that
happened earlier.
That higher level of understanding or abstraction..
ability in your brain.
That is the second stage.
Higher floor.
The first floor brain part.
The Mammalian Brain.
And, finally, the Primate or the Human Brain.
That is the outermost layer.
That is the seat of language.
That is the seat of imagination.
That is where your ability to reason.
Your ability to make decisions.
Your ability to decide between right and wrong,
good and bad, .. These things feature in this
highermost, topmost plane.
They call it the Triune Brain.
But wait.
This is a myth too, it seems.
Nothing of that sort.
If a brain starts thinking, the lizard will
start talking, at the same time the human
brain will be talking..
And, ti is a mad mix of all this that manifests
itself as a human behaviour.
People have done a lot of experiments, and
proved this beyond any doubt.
But, it is a beautiful, prevalent myth.
“You are in the fight-or-flight mode.
Think a bit.
Use your mind.
Use your brain.”
Won’t we say that?
That’s how they become prevalent myths.
This book is based on such myths as these.
But, sometimes, I feel, these kinds of myths
are useful.
No need to be too literal about it..
As if the Left brain stretches till 180 degrees,
and the right stretches from 180 to 360..
But, if you understand it conceptually, at
an abstract level, then, I think you are good
to go.
That’s what I did, when I went into this
book.
And, some very good discoveries, I made.
Before we go in, let me break down one more
myth.
Remember Daniel Kahneman?
System 1 Thinking.
System 2 Thinking.
Do you remember?
We encountered it once again in the “Hare
Brain, Tortoise Mind” book.
There are times when you need to instantly
react.
Gut reaction.
And, there are times when you need to NOT
react kneejerk.
We learned that you need to wake up, that
lazy, slow-thinking, but rational side of
your mind and that will give you good results.
THAT TOO, indicate there are “Two Parts”
in your brain!
So, we have seen many parts by now.
And, what does this book say?
Yes, there is System 1, System 2, Left-handed
thinking, Right-handed thinking, a hare, a
tortoise, a lizard, a chimpanzee, and a human
being too.
All of them.
Inside your brain.
All clamouring for attention.
All begging to be allow them to take control
of your mind.
Imagine a lizard ruling your mind.
Imagine a hare ruling your mind.
“Do not allow that sort of ruling!” — is
the essence of the book.
That central advice.
The book talks about a particular word — we
have encountered it in Mathematics.
The dreaded symbol — Integration!
What is integration?
Putting various pieces together into a meaningful
hole.
That is the message of this book.
All of these will be in every brain.
Most of them may be myths.
But they are useful myths.
And now, put them all together, and use them
at the right time, in the right context, in
the right manner.
Integrate!
Have an integrated approach.
Integrate your child’s mind!
That is the book’s message!
Here is an example!
The author says, assume this is the River
of Well-Being.
As you float along in that little boat, … it
is a smooth flow.
You are in “flow”.
(Remember Flow?)
As you are in flow, you look to the left and
you look to the right.
And there are two banks.
By accident, if you swing towards this bank,
this is the Bank of Chaos.
Confusion.
Total irritation.
No form.
No order.
Total mess.
And, by mistake, if you swing towards this
other bank, that’s the Bank of Rigidity.
Everything ordered.
Everything set in stone.
Nothing changeable.
Everything perfectly laid out.
No flexibility.
The point is, both of these are DANGEROUS!
Taking the example of the toy boat itself..
, imagine you have a toy boat, and you are
a toddler.
And, if you are going to say, “I will not
let any of my friends touch my toyboat collection,
because they will be adjusting it, they will
not put red next to green, which is how I
want it.. you know, Red, Green, Blue, Yellow,
those four colors?!
It will always have to be like that.
You are afraid of Chaos.
Is it not?
On the other hand, assume somebody takes a
boat away.
And you throw up a temper tantrum.
You turn your world upside down, shout at
the top of your voice from the rooftops, .. what
happens there, you are afraid of Rigidity.
So, if you are trying to steer away or steer
towards one of the banks, then, that is the
problem.
As long as you stay in the Middle Path, things
are going to be fine.
And, the author gives another analogy too,
in the book.
Emotionless means “Desert”.
He doesn’t laugh.
He doesn’t cry.
He is never happy.
We are never sure if he is unhappy.
He looks like somebody caught in a permanent
shock.
Emotional Desert.
Dangerous.
You can’t be parched like that.
Nor can you be flooded!
All the time hysteric, crying.
All the time extra-jubilant.
Sorry, you need that middle path.
And when will you get that middle path?
When you live an integrated life.
They give some examples.
Here is one.
Imagine a scenario where the child says, “I
don’t want to do my homework.
It is late in the night.
I want to watch my TV.
I don’t want to do my homework”.
Don’t Command and Demand.
“No way, you have to do the homework.
I am locking you up in the room.
The remote will be put away, until you finish
it.
Don’t even dream of it.
Don’t even THINK of it.”
That is Command and Demand.
The child is already upset emotionally, and
if you do this Command and Demand, that is
not going to help.
Instead, the same scenario..
Look at the change..
The woman bows down to the child’s level.
Eye to eye.
Already, she has come down from a sense of
authority.
After that, the woman is saying, “I know
how you are feeling..”
Connect!
“I know how you are feeling..
I know you want to watch that important football
match.
But, homework is important, is it not?
Let me do this..
I will stop my TV time too.
I will work with you instead.
Let us record it.
Tomorrow, before you leave for school, let
us watch the highlights!”
So, the child isn’t achieving what the child
wanted.
But, the child has been redirected.
The mother has connected with the child.
So, instead of Command and Demand, Connect
and Redirect!
Here is another example.
A child has scraped her knee, and bruised
it.
It is in a lot of pain.
“I scraped my knee”, the mother hears
this child cry.
“Crybaby!
Is this a matter at all??
This is NOTHING.
Everything will be alright.
Just stop it.
Don’t cry.
Crying like a ‘baebee girl’…” shames
the mother.
That is Dismissing.
“This is nothing.
Is this a pain at all.”
That is Dismissive.
Don’t do that.
Instead, what do you try?
Instead, you want to get into the game and
say, “Hey.. I was watching too.
It must have pained a lot.
I am sure..
For, I had a similar kind of fall when I was
a little child like you.
And, ouch.. for two days it throbbed.
Tell me how it happened?
You were turning, and then you slipped, .. and
then I came in, didn’t I?
I took you in my arms, I hugged you, did it
feel better?”
Tell the story.
Ask the child to tell the story.
When the child verbalises it.. remember?
Right brain emotion, Left brain language.
From that side to this side, when a connection
is made.., you come to the Middle Path, say
the authors.
So, get the child to tell the story, .. or,
tell the story and make the child a heroine
in the story, and there you get closer to
Integration.
We talked about the Lizard Brain and the Human
Brain.
And the two “stratified” layers.
And, the Lizard Brain is “downstairs”.
And, when the Lizard Brain takes over, it
makes the Human Brain nearly inaccessible.
It is almost as if a Baby Gate has been employed.
When the Lizard Brain takes over, you think
like a child!
You are childish in your behaviour.
Because.., when you were born, that very first
day, your Lizard Brain is active!
You know how to fly, how to run away, how
to fight, how to show fright, you already
know!
But, only as you grow older, you start showing,
demonstrating, higher level attitudes.
So, when you allow the Lizard Brain to take
over, be it myth or not, when you allow it
take over, you are becoming a child, locked
in the ground floor, unable to go to the higher
floor because there is a baby-gate laid by
the Lizard.
Here is another example!
The mom is driving.
Going home by car.
The daughter, in the back seat is angry.
Very Angry!
“I hate you”, she hollers.
The mother doesn’t even turn back to look
at her.
But says, “Don’t ever say that!
Do you know how many sacrifices I have made
in your life?
How dare you say that?
I will drag you up and punish you by pulling
your……”
Have you heard conversations like that?!
Thank God you haven’t, because you wouldn’t
have been in that car!
But, these conversations continue to happen,
they only Enrage the child even more.
Because, again, the Lizard is active now,
and if you are going to Enrage the Lizard,
it knows only about Flight and Fight.
Don’t Enrage.
Instead, how about the mother says, “I see
you are angry.
I understand.
But, is it because I didn’t allow you to
stay longer in the park with your friends?
We had to go elsewhere.
I had told you already.
Do you understand that you can’t be in two
places at the same time?
Is it okay if I drop you off tomorrow, give
you some extra time?
What do you think?”
So, instead of Enraging, Engage with the child.
Give them an opportunity to verbalise.
Why are you mad?
You are saying you hate me.
It is not that you hate me.
You are so angry, but the anger coming from
the right side of your brain doesn’t find
the right words in the left side of your brain
and it comes out as, “I will kill you!”
No, you don’t intend to kill me.
Try not to Enrage.
Try to Engage.
Here is another example.
I really like this one.
A child brings a frisbee to mom, at the park.
“Mom, I want to take this home”, says
the girl.
Immediately, the mom explodes.
“This is not OURS!
Put it back where you found it, you idiot!”
says the mother.
“Sorry, we can’t take this home”.
But, don’t stop there.
Don’t just answer.
Take it to the next level.
What is the next level?
Exercise the Upstairs.
What’s upstairs?
The child is at the Lizard level.
Upstairs is the Human level.
The reasoning brain.
So, talk to the child.
“I understand that you want to keep it.
I understand it looks good.
But, .. whose could this be?
That child may be no older than you!
What if she returns, looking for it, realising
that she had lost it here?
How will that child feel?
Can you tell me about it?”
When you engage thus, you are asking the child
to Exercise the Upstairs.
Because, if you don’t use it, you lose it,
they say.
Once in a while you have to exercise decision-making,
slow-thinking, system-2-thinking.
And, so on and on, the book goes!
There are TWELVE such pieces of advice.
I am yet to finish that book.
Hopefully, we will do one more episode, if
you like this one!
Let’s see!
But.., as a closing thought, this is what
I perceive.
The word “PARENT”.
What can a parent do, really?
Can they do this as well as that?
Yin as well as Yang?
System 1, System 2, Left, Right, Lizard, Human,
.. how many!!?
When I was thinking about it, I saw the word..
And I realised that there was an anagram sitting
there..
Do you spot it?!
Do you see that?
R!
If we add an extra R, you get PARTNER!
Are!
Multiple!
Plural!
Have somebody alongside!
So, my lesson, from that, is, it is not necessary
for each of you to exercise every one of those
sides…
If your mother is going to think like a rabbit,
the father is going to have to think like
the tortoise.
System 1, System 2..
Left, Right.
Creative, Big Picture.
Logical, Mathematical.
If you are like that, during every one of
these stages, the child will be an integrated
child.
Thank you then!
I will meet you again on December 10th.
In fact, on 10th, we have a double-load.
Both 436 and 437 are coming!
Looking forward to seeing
you soon!
Namaste!